Now let's take up the if statement.
Here's an example function
that uses the if statement.
And here's how it works.
I'm going to set x = 5, y = 0 and z = 0.
And then I'm going to test it.
I'm going to test if x is greater than 0,
current x is positive.
If y is greater than 0,
I'll print y is positive else,
I'll print y is not positive.
Let's see how that works.
So x is 5.
So when we get down to this statement,
we're really comparing 5 to
greater than 0, which is true.
So, we'll print that x is positive.
And there you see it's done, okay?
If y is greater than 0,
print y as positive else,
it'll print y as not positive.
But y is 0.
So, y greater than 0 is not true so,
it will not print this.
It will print y is not positive
instead and you see that is the case.
And then, you've got an else if statement.
Let's take z.
We'll test to see if z is greater than 0.
Well, that's not true, it is 0.
So we won't print z is positive.
Then we'll check if z is greater than 0,
which it's not, else if.
That's what elif means, else if z is
less than 0, we'll print z is negative.
Well, it's not negative either so
that won't happen.
And else will take care of anything else.
It'll print z must be 0,
and that's what it prints.
Okay, if we change the values of these,
things would work differently.
Okay?
So you got if, notice the if statement.
There's a condition that you test
to see whether it's true and
then it ends on a colon.
And then anything that's indented,
four spaces underneath that,
get's executed if this is true.
In the case of this, here's another
if statement, notice it end to colon.
This stuff that's indented,
if this is true, will get executed.
Else, this gets executed.
And this got executed,
notice else has a colon.
If z is greater than 0:
print z is positive,
else if z less than 0,
print z is negative,
notice the colon,
else: print z is must be 0.
Now I want to talk about equal signs for
just a minute.
Equal is an assignment, okay?
If I want to set x equal to 5,
I set it this way.
If I want to test to see if x is
equal to 5, I use double equals.
If I want to check to see
if x is not equal to 5,
I put exclamation point equals.
So this is assignment.
This test for equality,
this test test for not equals.
Here are some examples.
We give those x, y, and z values.
And then,
we'll try them out on these statements.
Okay?
This statement says print x = y, okay?
So we test to see if x = y.
And that will either be true or false.
X is equal to y,
is true so it prints true.
This has a value of true and
it prints that.
Okay?
Print x is not equal to y,
so we'll test for not equal.
Well, they are equal so this is false.
X is not equals to y is false and
that's what it prints.
If x is equal to z,
we'll text to see if x is equals to z.
Well, x is 5 and z is 6 so
that's just not true that x is equal to z.
And x is equal to z since it's not true,
it's false, okay?
The last one is we'll check to
see if x is not equal to z.
And x is not equal to z,
x is 5 and z is 6.
So x not equal to z is true,
and that's what it prints.
Here's an example of a function that
makes use of the double equals for
comparison, as well as the equals for
assignment, and does a computation.
Here, let me run it first and
then we'll talk about it.
This function, it completes
the area of a square or a circle.
First of all, I've got to tell it
whether we're talking about a circle or
square, okay?
If I tell it that we want
the area of a circle,
then I give it the radius of the circle,
5,
to say and
it computes the area of the circle.
If we say that we're computing
the area of a square and
I give it a 5,
then it computes a different number.
Let's see how it does that.
Well, the definition of the function here,
and
I use a variable type,
which will be either circle or square and
I give either the radius if it's a circle
or the length of a side if it's a square.
Now we have our usual documentation here.
Tells you how to run it,
Now we compare type,
To circle.
Notice we used the double equal.
If type == "circle",
then we'll do the following.
We'll do these two lines.
They're both indented the same
under that if statement.
Else, if type == "square",
then we'll do these two statements and
they're both indented four
spaces underneath the else if.
Else will print.
I don't know that one.
Let's do an example of that,
area of a parallelogram,
4, okay?
So, and by the way,
this unusual naming here is because type,
I wanted to use type here and
type is a keyword in Python.
It's a word like print,
that has a special meaning.
Or elif, that has a special meaning,
or if that has a special meaning, or
else, that has a special meaning.
Type names, the type of the variable,
like I said if an integer, or
a real number or a string, okay?
Now, so, I put an underscore right after
that to make it not just the word type.
Just a little technical thing.
Now, lets check this, if type == "circle",
Notice we have the colon at
the end of the equal, the if.
We have double equals here for
this is to check to see if they
are equal that doesn't do an assignment.
But here is an equal using assignment.
We're going to set area equal to pi and
x squared.
That's the formula for
the area of a circle.
And then we'll print the area,
elif type happens to equal to square.
And again, we use the double equals for
comparison.
And we'll compute the area
of a square if that is true.
And that's the side spread.
And we'll print that area,
else we'll just print we don't know.
We could expand this by repeating elifs,
and add additional types of figures.
Now, I want you to write a function
that makes use of the if statement.
I want you to compute
the absolute value of a number.
Here is my run of the program
on these test data.
Absolute value of 5 is 5.
The absolute value of -5 is 5.
The absolute value of 0 is 0.
So there are three runs of my program.
I think you should write the program and
make the print out look like mine,
the absolute value of.
Write that string, and
then give the number.
And then is, and then compute the absolute
value of that number and print that.
Remember, that if
the number is less than 0,
you just multiply by minus 1
to make it greater than 0.
When you finish writing your program,
press, The continue button to continue.
Here's my solution.
Definition, absolute value, number, colon.
If the number is greater than or
equal to 0,
then the absolute value of
the number is the number.
Else, the absolute value of the number
is the negative of the number.
Or minus one times the number.
And then,
once you've computed the absolute value,
then you could print the absolute
value of num is abs_num.